**From:** Boisy Pitre \
**Subject:** Re: Your grep implementation in NitrOS-9 \
**Date:** Tue, 23 Sep 2025 06:26:32 -0500

> On Sep 23, 2025, at 1:55 AM, Thalia Archibald wrote:
>
> Hello Boisy,
>
> I learned of your grep implementation for NitrOS-9 today and wrote a bit about it in my regular expression catalog\[0].

Good morning Thalia,

It was good to receive your email. Thank you for your interest and I'll be happy to oblige your questions.

> I don’t have any background with OS-9, so I was hoping you could fill in some details for me. Is there any relationship between NitrOS-9 and Microware’s OS-9? And, as I understand it, NitrOS-9 evolved from CoCo OS-9, sharing all code, only changing its name?

NitrOS-9 was started around 1992 by several Color Computer enthusiasts as an improvement to the 6809 version of the OS-9 operating system. It was NOT endorsed by Microware. Its creation was motivated by the Hitachi 6309 microprocessor which had additional instructions and features above the 6809. In 2000, right after I left Microware, I decided to disassemble NitrOS-9 and create an open source repository. That is the genesis of the current project. You can read about this here: https://www.cocopedia.com/wiki/index.php/NitrOS-9#:~:text=NitrOS%2D9%20was%20primarily%20a,into%20OS%2D9%20Level%20Two.

This is the first of a three-part video series on the history as well: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QRbl-Br8fjg

> Was your grep at all influenced by Microware’s, or for that matter, any other? Was there any particular story to it, or just filling in a missing tool?

I wrote an early implementation called fgrep for OS-9/6809 back in 1991 when I was attending the University of Southern Mississippi for my computer science degree. Incidentally, I wasn't aware that OS-9 even had grep at that point. My only familiarity was with the Tandy version of OS-9 Level Two, and it didn’t have any kind of regular expression utility. I first learned about grep by using a unique like operating system at the university called ESIX. My version of fgrep was inspired by that.

> Do you still have any versions of your grep from 1991 to 2002, from before the first Git revision of CoCo OS-9?

I went back and looked on the messages from the CoCo Princeton mailing list from around 1991. I found a few messages I’ve added below this email that show evidence of fgrep then.

That eventually made its way into a very early version of the repo, renamed as grep. At some point, I realized that fgrep was an already existing utility in the UNIX world, so I simply renamed it to grep and refactored the code a bit: https://github.com/nitros9project/nitros9/blob/master-sourceforge/3rdparty/utils/boisy/grep.asm

Note in the comments my address is Hattiesburg, Mississippi where the university was.

The latest and greatest is here: https://github.com/nitros9project/nitros9/blob/main/level1/cmds/grep.as

This should make the evolution clear.

> Do you know whether the source of the Microware OS-9 grep is available anywhere? It’s listed as being in OS-9 User's Group Public Domain Software Library, Volume #13: File Processing Utilities\[1]. Has anyone archived that? That makes it sound like it wasn’t distributed as a first-class part of the system. Søren Roug's OS-9 page has many links, but none that appear to be for the software library.

I don't think grep was ever a part of Microware's official set of utilities for OS-9/6809. It did make its appearance in OS-9/68K, but that version was written in C, I believe. As far as the public domain version you're referring to, I've searched, and I cannot seem to find any archive of those diskettes. The OS-9 User’s Group was very active in promoting OS-9 and compiling utilities for members contributions, but again utility itself was not distributed by Microware, thus I wouldn't call it a first-class, official part of the OS-9 distribution.

I hope this helped, and feel free to reach out to me with any additional questions.

> \
> Thanks! \
> Thalia Archibald

\[0]: https://github.com/thaliaarchi/regexp-museum/blob/main/greps/boisy.md \
\[1]: https://github.com/thaliaarchi/regexp-museum/blob/main/greps/os9.md

\========================================================================= \
\[Text of [1992-03-30_email.txt](1992-03-30_email.txt)] \
\=========================================================================

— \
Boisy Gene Pitre, PhD \
www.boisypitre.com
